glossary and resources 1.1

Audacity: A F/LOSS sound editing application for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
Bitstream Vera: A typeface released under a permissive license, allowing modification. 
Blender: A powerful F/LOSS 3D animation application for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
command line: A text only user interface, allowing users to input commands without the intervention of cursors and graphical user interfaces.
Constant: An arts organization based in Brussels, Belgium. The parent organization of Open Source Publishing.
Distro/Distribution: A specific configuration or "flavour" on GNU/Linux, often designed with a particular purpose in mind.
DRM (Digital Rights Management): Technologies (of whatever sort) which prevent users from making certain uses of the larger technologies to which the DRM is applied. 
FontForge: A F/LOSS font editor for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
Fontmatrix: A F/LOSS font management and selection tool for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
Free: As in freedom, or often, that which is or is of Free Software.
Free Software: A term describing software which is made available under licenses permitting users to not only run it, but to examine its code, redistribute it and modify it.
GIMP: A raster based image editor for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
Inkscape: A vector graphics editor for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
mailing list: An email based forum through which subscribers may receive announcements, view or participate in discussion.
Mandrake: A distribution of GNU/Linux. Now known as Mandriva.
OSP (Open Source Publishing): A graphic design collective which is dedicated to producing high quality work using F/LOSS tools.
PANOSE: A typeface classification system first developed in the 1980s.
Qt: Pronounced "cute." A F/LOSS development framework which functions across platforms and provides a common set of visual elements. 
repository: A stored collection of software packages, from which those packages may be dowloaded and installed. 
Subversion: A F/LOSS version control system for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
Torvalds: Linus Torvalds, the originator of Linux.
Ubuntu: A particularly popular distribution of GNU/Linux, produced by Canonical Ltd.
version control: A means of managing changes (and allowing reversion) to a commonly held body of work, most often a software project. 
vi: A F/LOSS text editor developed in the 1970s and still in use. Available for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows. 
